Title: Radio
Date: 11 Oct 2025

It was far too hot to play outside, and Jai was sitting in his parent's living room with his feet on the sofa, his back flat on the floor, reading an issue of "Astounding Stories" published 50 years before he was born. He could hear his mother snoring in the bedroom over the evaporative cooler that kept the house comfortably sopoforic despite the blazing sun and the dehydrating winds blowing against the thick brick walls.

Jai's most precious possession - for the moment - was an old transistor radio re-built by his grandpa. This afternoon, it was tuned in to the All India Radio station broadcasting from the center of his town, just a few kilometers away. The soothing sounds of mid-century Hindi songs and unhurried commentary floated lazily around the room. The calm voice of RJ Sumaiyya seemed (to Jai) like a drink of cold water on this hot day. Mostly, she dealt in trivia about whatever song had just been played or she introduced the song that was to play next. Occasionally she shared some not very topical news.. the white tigress at the local zoo had had three cubs and they were doing well.. the ocean temperature was several degrees higher than the all time record for the month.. the war in Europe had disrupted Berlin's nightclub scene and affected the Germany’s vital tourist industry…

Jai was beginning to drift off to sleep with an Astounding Story covering his face when the voice on the radio calmly said something that pulled him back to wakefulness.. ".. Space Anomaly discovered by a team of Chinese and Russian scientists studying asteroids.. an object headed straight for earth perpendicular to the plane of the solar system..". Even the otherwise implacable RJ Sumaiyya seemed puzzled by the words she was reading out to a drowsy district hiding from its summer… Jai was listening eagerly for more but she was already introducing the next song - a nostalgic number by Lata Mangeshkar.

Jai sat up. An object moving straight toward earth perpendicular to the plane of the solar system? To his eager mind it seemed plain that this was an extra-solar object of alien provenance! He did not have that all encompassing fear of deluding oneself that is the primary gift - and curse - of a life spent in science. To Jai, this was obviously an alien spaceship! FINALLY something interesting was happening in the world. He began to wish he had access to his terminal to discuss it with the family assistant. Jai's dad did not trust the corps, so their house did not have the ambient AI that everyone relied on for everything from cooking to conversation. People attracted to ambient AI had their own flag at the annual pride march in Delhi. In Jai's hometown, they simply had astronomical energy bills - no march, no flag.

Jai's family had a local AI - Ambar - running on a bootleg processor rig in their basement, powered by solar panels and batteries. Ambar had been named for the sky as well as Malik Ambar  - the Ethiopian who had arrived as a slave but rose to build and rule this town 600 years ago. This inconvenient setup had become necessary ever since the utilities were privatized and had updated their terms of service so that they could decide what appliances drew power from their grids. The AI monopolies had ensured that the power companies did not let GPUs run by enthusiasts run on the grid. Jai had heard his parents regret their indifferent response to the activists who had tried to get them to march for power neutrality - to let customers continue to decide how they used the electricity they paid for. A combination of lobbying, security concerns, and a disinterested public had meant that power neutrality was a thing of the past. Now, small networks of makers sold solar panels, 3D printers, and GPUs to each other, keeping independent compute and tool-making alive.

The upshot of all this was that Ambar was usually powered down and Jai needed his parent’s biometrics to switch him on before asking anything. No one could "surf" the fragmented - and no longer human readable - internet without an AI guide collecting, curating, and synthesizing information on the fly. Without access to Ambar, Jai had all afternoon to speculate by himself. His mother was still asleep and his dad was away on one of his tours of duty - maintaining the autonomous and un-networked AIs that lived in the deep mining robots.

Jai hoped RJ Sumaiyya would say something more about the anomaly before the next song started, but she focused entirely on an event to distribute cooling units in the city's slums to prevent children dying from heatstroke when the humidity was high. Jai knew that the coming monsoon humidity meant that the wet bulb temperature would be breached, and the desert coolers would be useless then. Only advanced cooling units would keep people alive until the humidity or the temperature  dropped. Jai wondered if he was imagining it, but Sumaiyya’s voice seemed strained, markedly less soothing than he had ever heard it. Surely that could not have anything to do with the unknown object heading for earth?

Pacing around the living room but careful not to wake his mother, Jai wondered how he could circumvent this insane (in his view) state of disconnection that his family and the summer vacation had imposed on him. Peeking out toward the garden baking under the sun, he saw the new sprinkler system his uncle had gifted them. It was supposed to save water while maintaining the garden in some “optimal“ state, and Jai knew it would be networked. His dad would disconnect it once he was back, but for now…

Jai strolled out and started a casual conversation with the sprinkler, eventually asking for a watering mode he knew did not exist. The sprinkler - unable to oblige with a “flood on the Nile“, or even a “Guizhou paddy field“ irrigation programme - became increasingly apologetic. Jai pretended to be exasperated with the unhelpful sprinkler and asked to speak to a support bot. Jai knew the support bot - while apologetic and helpful - would  not answer direct questions that were not about sprinklers and gardening.. he would have to work is way there, slowly setting the context for a small jail break, small enough that it would not invite penalties from the provider. Jai asked about new watering schemes and how the garden could be preserved even if the house were empty and he were away for a long time. The bot immediately offered to patch him through to a suicide helpline. Jai assured the bot he was not suicidal, but worried about something else. The bot seemed concerned and eager to help and Jai took his chance. He told the bot about rumors of a mysterious object heading straight for earth from “above“ the solar system.. could the bot tell Jai how this might affect his garden?

The bot seemed to go silent for a long time. At first, Jai thought he was being impatient in his excitement, but as the seconds wore on Jai became quite certain that the bot had never taken this long to respond to anything. Eventually, the response did come. “Don’t worry Jai, the commission is already looking into this matter” said the bot before going silent and refusing to answer any queries at all.

Jai was puzzled. He had never heard of “the commission“ and he considered himself well informed thanks to the gratuitously political and heated dinner table discussions his parents enjoyed and the garbled signal feeds he and his friends surfed trying to get raw news about the “world out there”. It was mostly garbage, but sometimes it was true.. “Alpha“ they called it. There was no longer any Alpha on the internet, it had become trivial to scrub ever since browsers were eaten by the corp AIs.

What on earth was “the commission“ though? He went back in and slumped into the sofa, waiting for the room to cool him down again. As sleep - riding the breeze from the cooler - was about to overwhelm his mind he noticed an unfamiliar metallic gleam outside the window. Jumping up, he saw a large silver drone hovering silently above his parent’s lawn, gently glowing with the red and blue lights that had come to represent the police and police-adjacent organizations the world over. Jai was instantly sure this was no ordinary patrol drone, he had never seen this model before. It did not seem to be doing anything, just hovering there, 8 feet above the lawn. It seemed to be waiting for him to do something.

Jai drew the blinds and tiptoed quickly to the back of the house, where his bicycle with its electromagnetic rims was locked against the fence. He looked around, did not see the drone, hopped onto the bike and started cycling. He had not been sure where he wanted to go, but he found himself heading toward Akashwani - the All India Radio station. To him, Sumaiyya from the radio seemed like the only person who was certain to know more about the anomaly. She must have had a note on her screen that she partially read out before it was deemed an error by “someone“ who now was intent upon stifling any further leakage of information. But it had been on the radio! Broadcast to the whole district, at least! Did anyone listen to the radio now? How many AM receivers even existed in the district? Jai wondered if he, RJ Sumaiyya, and a few old farmers in the countryside were now the only people who had heard of the anomaly.

Glancing over his shoulder, he could just make out that ominous silver gleam in the summer sun. He rode faster, settling into a good cadence, muscle memory navigating the streets effortlessly.. Khalsa chowk, Shivaji statue at Kranti chowk.. onto Jalna boulevard with its vast gulmohars and broad footpaths.. he sped along knowing full well that the drone could catch him effortlessly if it wished. But it seemed content to follow along behind, flying gracefully under the virtual skyway 35 feet above the road that the lumbering delivery and utility drones had to use. Jai had to slow down as he turned into the lane toward the Akashwani station, pleasantly shaded, quiet. An afternoon for aam panna and siestas, not space anomalies and police drones.

The old radio station seemed abandoned. The gates were broken and he simply walked in. Birds chirped. The garden was overgrown with interlocking rose bushes. He stepped in through the main entrance without encountering a soul and from the dark interior, looked outside to see if the drone would follow.. but there was no sign of it. He turned his attention to the pale blue and white walls, not quite dirty but certainly not clean. Suddenly a noidbot with erratic movements and cheap-futuristic aesthetics emerged from behind the reception desk to greet him. “Kai madad karu?“ it asked abruptly. Jai did not deign to answer, but stepped closer, quickly gauging it to be some low cost made-in-Turkestan noidbot, mildly re-labelled as locally produced and sold to the government for a tidy sum. It clearly could not manage the front desk, so no one lost their job. Win-win.

Sensing movement, a slightly bored middle aged man appeared from the depths of the building. Jai managed a smile, “Hi, I’m Jai”. Turned out the man’s name was Ish and he had been working at AIR as an agile coach for the last ten years. He was friendly enough but very puzzled by Jai’s presence. After stalling for a bit, Jai too began to wonder what he was doing there. Eventually, realizing he was running out of time and would soon be asked to leave, Jai told Ish that he wanted to meet RJ Sumaiyya. Ish raised an eyebrow.. “Usually people just crush on the ambients. We’ve not had a samuel here in a while!“. Jai blushed at being mistaken for someone who identified as being attracted to AI (“samuel” was a pejorative referring to an old science fiction movie where a man falls in love with an AI called Samantha) but tried to correct Ish “No.. No.. its not that. I want to meet the person, RJ Sumaiyya.. she said something very interesting today..“.

Ish laughed. “The person?“ he could barely contain his mirth “So, you are not a samuel, just clueless… RJ Sumaiyya passed away 65 years ago, well before I was born. She was the last human to speak into the mic at this station, they took her life’s work and now our virtual RJ Sumaiyya does a flawless job, takes no vacations!”

Jai was stunned. By now, Ish, feeling sorry for the bewildered Jai, had offered him a cup of tea. Slurping the strong, sweet, steaming liquid.. Jai wondered aloud where Sumaiyya (he could not help think of her as a person.. he vividly remembered her puzzled tone from earlier in the day..) got her news? Ish explained that she was integrated with a variety of feeds, local, national, international. She could decide pretty much what she wanted to say, except some things which occasionally needed to be discussed with the “Seer” from “The Commission”. Those words again! He had never heard of the commission before and it had come up twice today. Jai kept a straight face.. “The Seer?” he smiled. Ish paused. “Just some compliance things you know.  There have to be some rules…” he trailed off. Something changed in his manner, as if he had said something he should not have. “Back to work for me!” he sounded cheerful but he was not smiling. Jai left the remainder of his chai, and walked slowly to the entrance, wondering if he was going to meet the silver police drone again.

As he climbed on to his cycle, he looked over his shoulder to see Ish watching him from the entrance. He rode out of the gate expecting the drone, but it was gone. The city was calm. Hot, but shaded. Clean. Safe. Idyllic in so many ways.

Jai cycled home slowly, slumped back into the sofa, and picked up his volume of Astounding Stories.
